
#Chapter Outline

####Introduction

An introduction to the themes and topic of the dissertation.

####Chapter 1: Bold technical innovators and reckless speculators

Silicon Valley’s entrepreneurial capitalism is in many ways defined by
the activities and pronouncements of a select group of highly
influential founders and investors. Their positions are, as this chapter
will show, derived from a quite specific set of economic theories, most
notably Schumpeter’s definitional work on entrepreneurship and its
development by contemporary scholars such as Carlota Perez, and the
evolutionary economics of Brian Arthur. Normative expectations of
entrepreneurial character are also, it is proposed, shaped by a
tradition stretching to Weber, Sombart and even earlier writers – a
focus on the exceptionality of the founder’s abilities which is, it will
be argued, more significant in Silicon Valley’s venture-based
development model than in other modes of contemporary capitalism.
Presenting a brief history of the startup and venture capital firm in
relation to this genealogy of the concept of entrepreneurship and the
entrepreneur (and speculative investor), this chapter will present
ethnographic accounts and contemporary writings by participants in
startups and VC firms, through which the intersection between
historical–theoretical constructions of entrepreneurship and everyday
activity in Silicon Valley can be interrogated.

####Chapter 2: Making things that somebody wants

This chapter describes the process of customer and product development
which has been institutionalized in Eric Ries and Steve Blank’s “Lean
Startup” movement. Treating this process as an exercise in what George
Marcus calls “para-ethnography,” it shows how making knowledge about the
social world in which a startup’s products are (or might be) consumed
has become the predominant activity of early stage firms, and how their
success or failure increasingly depends on their ability to develop this
picture of their customers as much as on their technical prowess. This
chapter will present a selection of first-hand ethnographic accounts of
the author’s own product development process, along with discussions of
the influential trade literature, interviews with leading exponents of
the Lean Startup methodology, and participant-observation in other
startups’ customer development processes.

####Chapter 3: Design and (and against) ethnography

This chapter will situate practices of “ethnographic” and other product
development and design methodologies within their broader
anthropological context, placing professional UI/UX theory in dialogue
with contemporary archeological and ethnographic approaches to material
culture and technological change. In particular, it will critically
situate UX research practices, and the field’s sometimes antagonistic
relationship to anthropology, in the context of contemporary theoretical
stances toward material culture and cultural change. Treating the mobile
software at the core of so many Silicon Valley startups’ business models
as an artifact between situated between media systems and material
culture, it will show how the process of user research in design is
emerging as a reflexive discipline with its own distinct philosophical
genealogy and, at the same time, how it is enmeshed with other
para-ethnographic processes of value mediation to assemble the
agencement of a startup. In this chapter, observations from the author’s
own involvement in the product design process and interactions with
professionals in the field will be combined with interviews with product
managers from other firms, and critical analysis of the trade literature
in dialogue with contemporary material culture studies.

####Chapter 4: Unicorn hunters, angels and animals

This chapter will examine the venture capital sector in Silicon Valley,
taking as its point of departure the critical differences between this
highly social mode of capital management and the quantitative
calculative logics of “Wall Street” financial traders. Treating this
domain of activity as a third site of para-ethnography, along with the
customer development and user testing processes considered in the two
previous chapters, this chapter will present a collaborative engagement
with the internal discourses of Silicon Valley’s venture capital sector,
combining analysis of public texts with interviews and the “studio”
methods of ethnographic research which have proven so productive in
other studies of techno-economic elites. This data will ideally be
supplemented by the author’s participant-observation in at least one
firm or angel investor’s analysis and due diligence process.

####Chapter 5: Exit strategies: investing in post-human futures

Looking beyond the current state of technological development, this
chapter considers how Silicon Valley is able to envision a future in
which dramatic developments in machine learning and other fields related
to the automation of what are currently human labor processes will bring
about, at the least, significant shifts in the global economy in general
– and at the worst existential risks to human survival. These futures
are already seen as sufficiently probable to justify premising
entrepreneurial strategies on these radically contingent paths of
technological development. This willingness to assign value to this kind
of future-oriented enterprise is, it will be argued, premised on a set
of ontological commitments to the evolutionary nature of technological
change, and, notably, the expectation that the pace of this change will
itself increase exponentially. Through analysis of the writings of
various significant figures in Silicon Valley, including entrepreneurs,
investors and “Singularity” proponents, combined with interviews and
participant-observation in conferences and other events, this chapter
will show, the technological futures of Silicon Valley become, in
Appadurai’s terms, a “cultural fact” which enables – indeed, requires –
today’s entrepreneurs and investors to think beyond capital, and beyond
the human.

####Conclusions

To be determined.
