###Introduction

The first time I ordered a ride using the Uber app, on the way to SFO
from the East Bay to take a red-eye for NYU’s recruitment day on 28th
February 2013, the company was worth less than a billion dollars. It had
secured a Series B funding round of \$37m two months earlier. When I met
Garrett Camp, the firm’s founder, at Burning Man in August 2014, Uber
had closed a \$1.2 billion dollar Series D round in June, and went on to
raise the same amount again in December. It is currently valued at over
\$62bn – more than Ford or GM – and has become an archetype for the
“on-demand economy,” with startups frequently using the “Uber for x”
formula as a shorthand for their business model. Meanwhile, the company
has been the object of global labor protests and regulatory actions,
mostly aimed at defending the incumbent taxi industry from this highly
disruptive new entrant, and the firm’s reliance on treating its drivers
as the users of a software platform rather than employees has become
iconic of the sometimes troubling relationship between Silicon Valley
and non-technical labor. Travis Kalanick, the firm’s controversial CEO
(appointed shortly after its inception by Camp) has even broadcast his
enthusiasm for replacing these drivers with autonomous vehicles, and
Uber has invested over a billion dollars in research and development
projects in this field. Tellingly, the announcement of a change in the
firm’s logo and visual branding was accompanied by a statement from
Kalanick that proclaimed “We exist in the place where bits and atoms
come together…not just technology but technology that moves cities and
their citizens” (2016). Following a trajectory from offering an
app-based platform for the provision of real-world services, via
exponential capital growth, to an envisioned future of largely
autonomous industrial and infrastructural systems, it is in the
development of startups like Uber that, this dissertation will argue, a
substantially novel “ideal type” of capitalist economic activity can be
identified. The startup is, in contrast to the firms which were
goverened by the modes of accounting and valuation which characterized
earlier historical periods, uniquely oriented to the possiblity of
future value creation as opposed to the present. That is to say, the
defining feature of capitalism in Silicon Valley is that substantial
value may be assigned to an enterprise which the “balances” which, for
Weber, were at the core of the capitalism at an administrative level,
show losses of millions, or even billlions of dollars per year – and are
expected to remain negative, for an often undetermined period.

The ability of startup firms like Uber, Slack, Airbnb, and the numerous
other companies which aim to deliver services or distribute commodities
primarily, or even exclusively through a mobile application (with web
and other channels a secondary feature), to achieve valuations in the
billions of dollars within the space of a few years of operation –
earning so-called “unicorn” status – became a dominant narrative in the
American capitalist imaginary in 2014-15. Needless to say, the media has
followed recent declines in the valuations of a number these stand-out
firms no less assiduously. As the New Yorker put it in an interview with
Mark Andriessen, perhaps Silicon Valley’s most influential venture
capitalist,

> A great V.C. keeps his ears pricked for a disturbing story with the
> elements of a fairy tale. This tale begins in another age (which
> happens to be the future), and features a lowborn hero who knows a
> secret from his hardscrabble experience. The hero encounters royalty
> (the V.C.s) who test him, and he harnesses magic (technology) to
> prevail. The tale ends in heaping treasure chests for all, borne home
> on the unicorn’s back. (Friend 2015)

Andriessen is perhaps best known for his assertion (which guides his
firm Andriessen-Horowitz, or a16z) that “software is eating the world” –
an era-defining statement for the “app economy” which depends on the
ubiquity of highly capable mobile computing devices in its quest to
reconfigure many of the structures of commodity production and
distribution which have emerged over the last century of capitalist
development. Existing industries are, in this seemingly inexorable march
towards the dominance of software-centric business models, “disrupted”
through shifts in the relations of production such as the development of
a so-called “sharing economy” (as in the case of Uber and Airbnb) in
which the line between personal property and business assets which
characterized Western capitalism in the 20th century is blurred.
Ubiquitous mobile computing and the delivery of services through apps
which are, as it were, always “ready at hand” to consumers are the key
to this disruptive process.

As the site of entrepreneurial activity in this sector par excellence,
the San Francisco Bay Area has emerged as a center of innovation which
increasingly targets not only the development of radically new
technological spheres such as the microprocessor or computer networking
equipment, but which aims to take on and “disrupt” existing industries
and markets on a global scale. To date, the software industry in Silicon
Valley has been approached by only a handful of ethnographers
(Lueck-English 2002, Finn 2001), and while the roots of today’s
entrepreneurial ecosystem and future-oriented investment processes
clearly lie in the “dot com boom” of the 1990s (and, as we will see,
even earlier iterations of the venture capital–startup configuration),
the pattern of business development which has become normative today is
significantly different from its own earlier iterations. Uniquely, this
dissertation will describe the increasingly standardized process of
startup formation, funding and growth (and/or failure) through an
ethnographic account of the formation of a startup from its very
earliest stages. It will show how entrepreneurs and investors engage in
a wide range of remarkably sophisticated processes of social knowledge
production, in addition to the highly technical productive labor with
which Silicon Valley is more usually associated – and how these
practices diverge from the norms of other modes of contemporary
capitalism.

The ability of successful startups to accumulate value at such a
remarkable pace is, according to the conventional analysis offered by
the business press and those investors inclined to publicly comment on
their strategic vision of the developing market, closely linked to their
sensitivity to their users’ needs, and their ability to rapidly iterate
the design of their product to better meet those needs. This
sensitivity, and methods by which it can be reliably cultivated, have
been enshrined in the “Lean Startup” movement, an approach to business
development which emphasises dialog between the entrepreneur and her
potential customers at the earliest stage of a startup’s existence –
ideally, before any technical labor has been invested in it. In a
notable inversion of the myth of the inspired inventor (who must find a
market-oriented capitalist to bring their novel device to market), the
“Lean” entrepreneur aims to succeed by building a product which is
fitted to the needs of their users, based on those same users’ account
of those needs and/or the entrepreneur’s quasi-ethnographic observation
of the “pain points” that consumers encounter when, for instance, doing
laundry. While the more extreme valuations of relatively early-stage
firms have come under increasing pressure in recent months (with the
“correction” of private company valuations being at least publicly
welcomed by many VCs), the ability to identify their users’ needs based
on more or less formal social research remains probably the most
desirable quality in startup firms, from an astute investor’s
perspective. The prevalence of writing – typically published on Medium –
which expounds startup founders’ own philosophy of product development
here serves as not only an invaluable resource for this study but,
arguably, as a performative practice which itself signals the quality of
their entrepreneurial endeavors to investors and others.

Stewart Butterfield, founder of Slack – a team messaging platform aimed
at organizations which replaces email for communication between workers
(and another “unicorn,”) – sent a memo to his employees (which he later
posted on the Medium blogging platform) on July 31st 2013, just before
the product’s public launch, which encapsulates his own approach to
product development. Butterfield, who, incidentally, holds an MPhil in
the History and Philosophy of Science from Cambridge, observed that

> In the best case, there is a dialectic at play here: the product
> itself and the way people use it should suggest new ways of
> articulating the value — and refinements to how we communicate the
> value should lead to principles which clarify decision-making around
> product features and design. (Butterfield 2014)

If Travis Kalanick reflects a “toxic” dimension of startup culture (the
“tech bro” so despised by long-term San Francisco residents, journalists
and the public in general), Butterfield’s missive is exemplary as an
indicator of the level of sophisticated reflexive discourse which also
surrounds the current wave of entrepreneurial value creation in Silicon
Valley. By paying close attention to the ways in which their product is
adopted into the everyday working practices (and even organizational
culture) of its users’ firms, Slack can, Butterfield proposes,
iteratively and dialectically develop not only a better product, but
also strategies to mediate value more effectively by engaging in deep
processes of social knowledge-making. We might well ask whether this
value is being mediated here to potential investors (at least, by the
publication of what was initially an internal memo) as much as to users
of the product itself. Butterfield goes on to assert that “The best  –
 maybe the only?  – real, direct measure of ‘innovation’ is change in
human behaviour.” Given that his goal is to replace email as the primary
means of intra-organization communication, Butterfield’s entrepreneurial
goal is predicated on quite a substantial degree of behavioral change on
the part of Slack’s users; as we will see, he here demonstrates a
sensibility to the relation between material technological artifacts and
sociocultural systems that has surprising resonances with contemporary
archeological, as well as anthropological theory. An example of the
“Lean Startup” approach to product development, Butterfield’s
quasi-ethnographic approach to thinking about the role that its product
has in its users’ lives is widely credited in entrepreneurial circles
with enabling Slack to achieve a valuation of some \$2.8bn less than two
years after its public launch.

My own introduction to Slack came when I implemented SupportKit, a
mobile app customer support SDK which allows users to chat with an app’s
customer service team (or, in the case of early stage startups, with the
founders). This project has been deeply shaped and informed by working
to produce my own “minimum viable product” to test a concept for a
sharing economy platform and launching it as TimesFree, a platform which
enables non-monetary, time-based task sharing for small co-operative
groups. Following a customer development process which led to a shift
from the original concept – a cryptocurrency based on Marx’s discussion
of labor money developed in Prof. Helen Nissenbaum’s graduate class – to
a product aimed at a specific and unexpected market segment (babysitting
co-ops), this enterprise has already given me first-hand experience of
both the technical labor and social knowledge production processes
involved in this form of entrepreneurship. Developing the market
structure and matching algorithm which serves as the core of the “back
end” of this service in a doctoral class with Prof. Arun Sundararajan at
NYU Stern, probably the most influential theorist writing on the sharing
economy, I used agent-based simulation modeling to optimize the
performance of scrip-based economies, an approach which itself is
closely linked with systems theory and evolutionary approaches to
economics. Involvement with the entrepreneurial process at this deep
level will, of course, grant me a unique perspective on the questions
which this study will address, along with the creation of an archive of
material (both directly related to business processes and otherwise)
which traces the formation of a startup in considerable detail, and the
acquisition of a wide range of contacts and opportunities for
ethnographic observation.

It must be pointed out, of course, that an early-stage venture like
TimesFree is subject to inherent risks – not least a failure to secure
“seed” capital to develop the business to a scalable, and hopefully even
profitable level. With most accounts indicating that the typical time
for a startup to successfully complete a funding round at this stage is
in the range of two to four months, however, the prospects for this
venture will become significantly clearer shortly, at least by the
standards of ethnographic fieldwork. Regardless of whether I succeed in
obtaining substantial investment in TimesFree, such a substantial public
archive of discussions of the practice of entrepreneurship and venture
capital investment that this project is far from dependent on the path
which this particular venture takes – indeed, a more narrowly focussed
project might produce a useful, if thinner description solely of the
role of new media in constituting the startup as an organizational form.
Observations from my own entrepreneurial activities will, of course, be
substantially augmented by original ethnographic research: although my
leadership role at TimesFree will hopefully stand as a point of
departure and to some extent the central narrative of this study, more
conventional ethnographic interviews and participant-observation in a
range of Silicon Valley organizations (both startups and venture capital
firms) will constitute the majority of the material on which this work
will be based.
