#Literature Review

This review will first present some central texts in the history of
theories of entrepreneurship, and will consider the influence of this
body of work both at the level of normative accounts of the figure of
the entrepreneur and speculative investor and at the level of
macroeconomic and historical analysis. Notably, the roots of the
construction of the entrepreneur as unusually adept at making sense of
the social world (in contrast, or at least in addition, to any
exceptional technical ability) will be seen in the earliest accounts of
capitalist innovation. This tradition is intertwined with a
“process-and-emergence” view of economic activity in the work of Brian
Arthur (1996, 2009), Carlota Perez (2003) and even Kevin Kelly (1995) –
forming, it will be argued, a relatively consistent and distinct body of
theoretical presuppositions which guide the thinking of entrepreneurs
and venture capitalists in Silicon Valley today. Having considered both
personal and structural theories of entrepreneurship, following the
structure of the research questions presented above, the literature on
role of ethnographic processes in the product design process will then
be considered, along with recent work in material culture studies which
perhaps offers a more constructive approach to the integration of
questions of both iterative design methods and longue durée
technological development. Finally, the somewhat limited prior work on
Silicon Valley itself will be briefly reviewed.

###Entrepreneurship and (or against) speculative capital

The role of entrepreneurship in capitalism is a topic which has always
operated as a “minor tradition” in relation to neoclassical economics
and its focus on the impersonal mechanisms of “the market:” as we will
see, the methodological emphasis on the personality of the entrepreneur
and the differential ability of agents to fulfill the entrepreneurial
function within the broader capitalist economy distinguishes this field
of economics from the theoretical roots of financial capitalism and its
essential depersonalization of the activity of economic agents. First
used by Cantillon in 1755 to refer to “a specialist in taking on risk
\[who\] ‘insures’ workers by buying their output for resale before
consumers have indicated how much they are willing to pay for it”
(Casson 2010: 7), the meaning of entrepreneurship which is current in
the technology industry today is more or less equivalent to that
proposed by Joseph Schumpeter. For Schumpeter,

> the function of entrepreneurs is to reform or revolutionize the
> pattern of production by exploiting an invention or, more generally,
> an untried technological possibility for producing a new commodity or
> producing an old one in a new way, by opening up a new source of
> supply of materials or a new outlet for products, by reorganizing an
> industry and so on. (2003 \[1943\]: 132)

This “functional” definition of the entrepreneur in Schumpeter’s later
work represents a shift from his earlier account, which placed greater
emphasis on the personal qualities of the entrepreneur who must “foresee
and estimate on the basis of his experience” (Schumpeter 1926: 64) – a
shift which, for Campagnolo and Vivel (2012), is linked to his
increasing focus on innovative activity in larger firms. Schumpeter
nonetheless continued to place some stress on the role of the
entrepreneur as an agent whose ability to act effectively in the
radically unfamiliar conditions that characterize the development of a
new technology “requires aptitudes that are present in only a small
fraction of the population and that define the entrepreneurial type as
well as the entrepreneurial function” (2003 \[1943\]: 132, emphasis
added). Thus, to an extent again apparently greater than that seen even
in the case of the “discipline” of financial market traders, there is a
normative expectation of a set of personal traits which, it is
suggested, are common to successful entrepreneurs – and which,
unsurprisingly, an entire industry is now devoted to identifying and
fostering.

Schumpeter’s emphasis on the personality of the entrepreneur reflects
the roots of his thinking in the thought of Wieser and Sombart: for the
former, for instance, entrepreneurs are “bold technical innovators,
organisers with a keen knowledge of human nature, far-sighted bankers,
reckless speculators…” (Wieser 1914, cit. Campagnolo & Vivel 2012:
915-6). This characterization is still all too easily recognizable in
the self-construction of Silicon Valley entrepreneurs today, and in the
context of the present study, the identification of a need for a “keen
knowledge of human nature” in this foundational account of
entrepreneurship in economic theory obviously points to the roots of an
ethnographic sensibility in the deep strata of an archeology of this
term. In The Bourgeois (1920), Sombart carefully distinguishes the
entrepreneur from other types of capitalist, emphasizing how their role,
as Preda puts it, “implied selling (not always ripe) ideas to a broader
public, a process in which the projector’s powers of persuasion played a
crucial role” (Preda 2009: 46). Once again, we can see the origins of
the figure of the “founder” today in the earliest roots of theories of
entrepreneurship; indeed, it is hard to avoid a recurring sense that the
normative construction of the effective startup founder found in
business discourse today represents the form of capitalist activity
closest to that described a century ago at, or even before the dawn of
“entrepreneurship studies” proper. The “pitch,” the central performative
demonstration of the entrepreneur’s idea to an audience of potential
investors, is perhaps the moment in contemporary capitalist activity
where, most directly, the entrepreneur’s “rhetorical power to convince
and impress the public, to make promises and awaken hopes, mediates
between markets and society and is essential with respect to the
former’s legitimacy” (ibid.). The startup founder hoping to provoke a
level of enthusiasm that leads to their funding round being
over-subscribed is an all too recognizable iteration of Sombart’s
“projector,” seeking speculators possessed of a “gambling fury” a
century earlier.

It is, of course, notable that none of the historical definitions of
entrepreneur or speculator describe a figure who can readily be equated
with today’s venture capitalist. Sombart’s entrepreneur, in the
lightly-governed capital markets of the first decades of the 20th
century, had to persuade a substantially less informed public in his
quest for investment than today’s startup founder. Indeed, with the
exception of “crowdfunding” platforms, soliciting investment in
early-stage firms from individuals who are not “qualified investors” in
the Securities and Exchange Commission’s definition of the term, which
excludes those who are not deemed sufficiently wealthy and, in legal
terms, “sophisticated” to take on these kinds of risks, remains illegal
– the regulatory consequence of the disruptive potential of
entrepreneurial capital-raising that was demonstrated so dramatically in
the 1930s. Even within the types of professional capitalist speculator
discussed by Schumpeter, there is no term for investors who have
developed the kind of specialist expertise and “hands on” approach to
involvement in their selected firms which we see in VC firms
specializing in early stage technology startups – less than
surprisingly, given that the emergence of this model of development
essentially dates from the decade after Schumpeter’s death (Kenney
2011). Indeed, if the entrepreneur is a figure who – as Schumpeter and
his followers insist – must be distinguished in character as well as
function from the “inventor” or “manager” (a distinction we can see
today between those seen by investors and their peers as qualified for
chief technology or operations officer roles, versus “CEO material”
individuals), we should ask how clear a distinction needs to be drawn
between this class of productive activity and the field of finance in
anthropological terms. Moreover the close proximity between
entrepreneurial activity proper and investment – particularly in very
early-stage firms – by venture capitalists who are themselves former
entrepreneurs has, arguably, contributed to the development of an easily
recognizable VC “type” which can be rather easily distinguished from
that of other capitalist investors – a figure which is now strongly
shaped by the enthusiastic participation of a number of high-profile
investors in discussions on Twitter and Medium, as well as personal
blogs and other writings.

At the broadest level, it is clear that both entrepreneurial and more
strictly financial capitalism operate as more or less, although far from
entirely, distinct economic spheres today: while, as we will see, the
operations of a venture capital firm are radically distinct from those
of, for instance, a hedge fund or investment bank, there are obviously
some both cultural and technical areas of overlap between “Wall Street
capitalism” and “Silicon Valley capitalism.” Brouwer’s discussion of
Weber’s entrepreneur, Schumpeter’s innovator and Knight’s risk financier
is instructive on this point: she draws a distinction between the
productive innovator and the financier, whose expertise lies in
“investment as a discovery process \[because\] many new ventures will be
launched, but only a few will survive and prosper” (2002: 92), a
position in contrast to what she claims, problematically, is an implicit
assumption of infallibility on the part of investors on Schumpeter’s
part. While these three authors stand as genealogical points of origin
in any historical analysis of the concepts of innovation and investment
under capitalism, it is productive here to take up Appadurai’s critique
of her comparison of these three theoretical stances, and, indeed, to
point to the limits of critiques of financial capitalism when applied to
entrepreneurial ventures. In the case of the venture capital sector, we
find a mode of opportunity selection (and thus of profit-making) which
does not depend on a particular strategy of “divination, of reading the
signs, charts, trends, flows, patterns, and shifts in the market”
(Appadurai 2011: 532) so much as on Sombart’s “keen knowledge of human
nature” and knowledge of the social conditions of quite a different kind
of “market” from the ones in which the elites of the financial markets
ply their trade. The market which the VC needs to know is the market
with which the startup’s product must find a fit if it is to survive.

This level of personal involvement between investor and the recipient of
capital, evident from venture capitalists’ own admission of the
importance of interpersonal factors in their investment decisions, is
somewhat unusual, if not positively contrarian, in the context of modern
bureaucratic capitalism. By contrast, the highly technical nature of the
enterprises involved, and the wealth of quantitative data which they
generate, if anything highlights the unusual role of social factors in
this sector. Given the emphasis which has rightly been placed on the
role of the materiality of financial markets in structuring both their
activity and, in more phenomenological terms, the lifeworld of their
participants (including, notably, Appadurai 2015; Cetina & Bruegger
2000; Hardie & MacKenzie 2007; Ho 2009; MacKenzie 2008a, 2008b; Riles
2004; Zaloom 2003, 2006, 2009), the differences between the practices by
which technology entrepreneurs and investors in startup firms assess
risk and uncertainty, and the methods used in the derivatives, currency
and equity markets deserve to be taken seriously as a point of
distinction between the financial capitalism which these authors have
described and the object of the present study.

While clearly still present in some processes (such as the use of the
Black-Scholes equations in the so-called “hybrid method” of early-stage
firm valuation, in which a process known as “backsolving” is applied to
derive the present value of a firm from past transactions using option
pricing methods) the modes of calculative reasoning which dominate the
activities of, say, a derivatives trading fund are, in the case of the
venture capital firms and startups found in Silicon Valley, subordinate
to a set of processes of social and even historical assessment. As
Brouwer makes clear, in her discussion of venture capital in Silicon
Valley in juxtaposition with Weber’s analysis of merchant capital in the
commenda form of medieval Italy, “The venture capitalist fulfills the
Knightian entrepreneurial function of selecting the venture. The founder
is the entrepreneur in a Schumpeterian and Weberian sense, if he leads
the new enterprise” (2008: 59; emphasis added). We might add that
neither Schumpeter nor Weber, at least in Brouwer’s reading, seem to
quite capture the orientation to the social at the heart of Sombart’s
earlier definition and which, it is argued, dominates the investment
selection process today. In Silicon Valley, the chief concern of
investors (and wise founders) seems to lie not so much in the domain of
Knightian uncertainty, but rather in the risk that a venture may be, in
entrepreneur and investor Ash Maurya’s words, “building something that
nobody wants.”

###Evolutionary economics: monopolies in the age of networked capitalism

Silicon Valley’s broadly Schumpeterian model of entrepreneurship as a
function within capitalist development, and of the character of the
entrepreneur themselves, is itself situated within a broader popular
reading of Schumpeter’s economic history. In this evolutionary account
of technological development the individual entrepreneur occupies a
central, even heroic role; yet beyond the vicissitudes of individual
innovators’ struggle for success, the onward force of technical
evolution provides a grand narrative of progress in which technical
rationality and market irrationality are interwoven to produce the ebbs
and flows of historical market trends. For the Schumpeterians, as,
tellingly, for Marx, the ultimate determinative factor in history is the
state of technological development: today, the expectation of imminent
radical shifts in human technological capability (most notably the
development of artificially intelligent systems) exerts an apparently
compelling influence on many of Silicon Valley’s most successful
investors. This expectation is evident from initiatives like Sam
Altman’s call for research into a “universal basic income” as a
political response, on the part of technological innovators, to the
disruption to the wage form which is predicted to arise from the
widespread deployment of automated and autonomous industrial systems.

Just as the algorithms of derivative pricing have come to shape the
behavior of the options market, so too a singular tradition of economic
thinking has come to explicitly inform the discourse of leading
participants in the Silicon Valley economy. Schumpeter and the so-called
“neo-Schumpeterians,” most notably Carlota Perez (2002, 2009 and
elsewhere), exert a highly visible presence in the public construction
of venture capital as the driver of human development and, moreover, as
a determinant of investment strategies. In this respect, the economic
models which serve as the “engine,” in MacKenzie’s terms, of Silicon
Valley are not the risk pricing models of the derivative markets or,
even, the knowledge of the (consumer) market which can be derived from
“big data” analytics. Rather, the dominant paradigm in Silicon Valley is
closer to that of so-called “evolutionary economics,” the branch of
economic theory which has most actively taken up Schumpeter’s ideas and
which, moreover, has been most enthusiastic in adopting the ideas and
methods of complexity theory – what economist and systems theorist Brian
Arthur terms a “process-and-emergence perspective” on the economy
(Arthur 2009: 91). As we will see, the confluence of a somewhat
selective reading of Schumpeterian thinking on entrepreneurship,
combined with a highly optimistic reading of evolutionary economics in
the context of emerging technologies like “deep learning” and other
forms of artificial intelligence, is determinative of the orientation of
Silicon Valley market participants towards new venture opportunities in
both explicit and, arguably, more subtle ways.

High-profile venture capitalist Marc Andreessen recently made the
following observation that the technology sector will continue to
experience exceptional rates of growth:

> First the new technology is not taken seriously at all. Then it’s
> taken way too seriously way too quickly. Everybody gets too excited.
> Then there’s a gigantic catastrophe, and then stuff actually starts
> happening. (Mangalindan 2014)

As the author notes, Andreessen here explicitly made reference to Perez’
Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: The Dynamics of Bubbles
and Golden Ages (2002) – a work which is also “assigned” to the founders
of startups receiving funding from New York’s Union Square Ventures,
indicating the weight attached by influential investors to Perez’
thought. Thus, the significance of this strand of economic scholarship
to the present study is not merely to establish the prior theoretical
and conceptual ground of this inquiry in scholarly terms, but rather to
situate this project within the prior texts of the elite participants in
this social field, for whom theoretical constructs like Perez’ “long
wave” constitute a vital element in the reflexive process of strategy
formation and risk assessment (including, presumably, opportunity
selection on the part of investors). Thus, for firms like USV and
Andriessen-Horowitz, an investment opportunity needs to be considered
not only in the context of its technical merits, but also as a
historical process which intersects, for better or worse, with broader
market conditions – leading, in some instances, to ostensibly sound
businesses “failing” (whether literally or relative to expectations)
because of their entanglement in speculative market processes driven by
the irrational exuberance (or, conversely, equally irrational panic) of
the equity markets. Perez’ work suggests that venture capitalists should
treat the cyclical overvaluation of technology stocks as both inevitable
and, as responses to the current market downturn indicate, as a form of
risk which sophisticated, long-term oriented investors can mitigate, as
Andreessen’s comments suggest, at least partly through a critical
understanding of the nature of economic cycles which reflexively informs
their investment activities.

In particular, Perez focusses on the nature of “bubbles,” moments in
which enthusiasm for new technological developments as investment
opportunities leads to a decoupling of share prices from “rational
expectations” for the future value of the company in question, and on
the shifting balance between what she terms “financial capital” and
“production capital.” In her model, the emergence of periods of
irrational exuberance, as part of the cyclical process of diffusion
associated with a major new technology (like railroads or the
telegraph), leads to “long-term pendular swings \[which\] are as much in
the nature of the market economy as the fact that economic growth, as
Schumpeter held, is driven by technical change” (Perez 2009: 780). Thus
Andreessen, perhaps the most influential venture capital investor in
Silicon Valley can be reported in the mainstream business press
espousing, quite explicitly, a model of technological development which
is essentially more narrative–historical than empirical–technical in
character, not to mention emphasizing, as Marx did, the crucial role of
technological development in economic change. No less significant in the
reception of Perez’ theory is her implicit attribution of irrationality
to profit-driven speculators rather than entrepreneurs – who, at least
ideally, are enthused with the potential of their venture rather than
merely the desire to profit from an undeservedly high market valuation.
To a keen knowledge of human nature, then, we might say that the venture
capital–entrepreneurial system of Silicon Valley now adds the
requirement that its participants demonstrate their competence at
understanding the present historical moment in a grand narrative of
cyclical, but ultimately relentless technological evolution. The
resemblance of this narrative to a certain tendency in Marxist thought
is, as we will see, far from coincidental.

While the Schumpeterian arm of the rather loosely defined field of
“evolutionary” economics exerts considerable influence in discussions of
venture capital investment strategy, the sense of the term which refers
to theoretical models of the economy as a complex evolving system is no
less significant in its impact both on the concept of value in a
networked business environment, and on the broad acceptance of
expectations of a continuing exponential path of technological progress.
Evolutionary economics, in this sense, forms a bridge between the
“counterculture” and spiritually-infused theories of teleological
development, such as the work of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin and
Buckminster Fuller, and West Coast entrepreneurial capitalist culture at
a deeper theoretical level than has been captured by analyses such as
Turner’s influential (2010) discussion of the influence of Stewart Brand
and the “New Left” on Silicon Valley. The positions developed by a range
of thinkers both within academic research and on the boundary with
popular discourses on technological development and academic computer
science, economics and media studies – from Clay Shirky (2008) to Brian
Arthur (1996, 2009, 2014), Nick Bostrom (2014) and Ray Kurzweil (2000,
2005, ) – which shape the thinking of a wide range of actors in Silicon
Valley (up to and including their inclusion in VCs’ lists of influences
on their investment strategies) can, it will be argued here, be linked
via what Best and Kellner termed “Kevin Kelly’s complexity theory”
(1999).

Compared to the neoclassical economic theorists who dominate both
business schools and policy-making institutions, evolutionary economics
remains somewhat marginal in its influence outside of Silicon Valley and
other high technology investment centers. Most notably for many startup
founders, this field has given rise to the recognition that product
adoption does not take place on an agent-by-agent basis, but, in the
case of networked services, exhibits emergent, metastable “network
effects” which, it is now widely accepted (e.g. Farrell and Klemperer
2007), are the key to generating both value and competitive advantage in
the internet age (Arthur 1996). The search for businesses which are
predicted to exhibit network effects now dominates the investment
strategies of many consumer-focussed venture capital firms. Indeed, the
existence of or potential to create a business characterized by strong
network effects, in which the usefulness of any given version of the
product grows exponentially in relation to the size of its user base is
probably the predominant criterion for assessing ventures as investment
opportunities in a large segment of the technology industry today,
particularly in the case of platforms in the so-called “sharing
economy,” along with messaging and other social networking services. The
emergence of these network effects is typically understood to imply that
many, if not all potential markets will come to be dominated by one
essentially monopolistic firm – as the natural consequence of the way in
which systems like marketplaces or social networks are organized (Thiel
2014). At a much broader level, too, an evolutionary paradigm shapes
investment and commercial strategies which depend on the acceleration of
technological change as enabled by shifts such as the modularization of
technologies (allowing new, more complex systems to be developed
increasingly rapidly from a “library” of interoperable hardware and
software elements), the exponentially increasing pace of data gathering
and storage from all sources, and the development of “deep learning”
algorithms which can exceed human performance in specific domains. Thus
the valuation of a firm like Uber may encompass expectations that the
firm’s efforts to develop and deploy revolutionary new technologies like
autonomous vehicles are, within the bounds of venture capital’s
speculative activity at least, credible enough.

Despite its significant cultural impact, complexity theory receives only
a brief mention in Turner’s communications and media-focussed study of
the influence of the counterculture on the Silicon Valley-centered
“cyberculture,” and that in connection to the upheavals that
network-based business models and practices wrought on established large
firms. “The systems-oriented rhetoric of complexity theory,” he
observes, “buttressed by the cultural legitimacy of Stewart Brand,
offered a compelling framework within which to understand the
topsy-turvy economy of the late 1980s and early 1990s” (Turner 2010:
193). Given the substantial practical implications of Arthur’s
“systems-oriented rhetoric,” in particular the economic value attached
to network effects, it might be questioned whether Turner has fully
accounted for the importance of this mode of analysis in material terms.
It might be argued, indeed, that a “process-and-emergence” model of the
economy may in fact account for the “topsy-turvy” conditions of the
emergence of networked capitalism rather more satisfactorily at an
empirical level than previous modes of economic analysis; indeed, it is
on precisely this assumption that neo-Schumpeterian investment
strategies seem to proceed, consciously updating Schumpeter’s own
theories of entrepreneurial development with a characteristic mode of
evolutionary–emergentist thought.

This mode of “systems thinking” was, to hugely influential effect,
espoused by Kevin Kelly, founding editor of Wired magazine (and long
time associate of Stewart Brand). It has been described by Best and
Kellner in terms which, it is argued, capture the breadth of the
implications of this outlook as a set of ontological commitments rather
more fully than Turner’s brief treatment:

> Drawing on cybernetics, chaos and complexity theory, evolutionary
> theory, information theory, and discussions of new technologies, Kelly
> claims that we need fresh models of thought that articulate the
> parallels between the organization of nature, the novel environments
> of technology, and the dynamic human and social milieux. (1999: 142)

The acceptance of an “evolutionary” view of technological and economic
development, which is essentially equivalent to Arthur’s
“process-and-emergence” economy – a view which seems to owe as much to
Bateson, Bergson or Whitehead as Mandelbrot and Dosi – is, it is
proposed, so pervasive as to constitute the primary ontological ground
of Silicon Valley as a cultural and economic system. The sense in which
evolutionary economics deploys the term “evolution” is, it should be
pointed out, somewhat distinct from the sense in which it is usually
used to refer to biological systems: Arthur himself indicates that, in
discussions of technological evolution, he means the sense in which “all
objects of some class are related by ties of common descent from \[a\]
collection of earlier objects” as well as “the gradual development of
something” (2009: 7). Elsewhere, however, he states the definition in
more cybernetic terms: describing an early computational simulation
model of a biological system, he observes that “you could allow the
system to start with not-so-good rules and replace these with better
ones it discovered over time” (2014: xiii). This latter definition is,
it is proposed, one which is both central to artificial intelligence
research (where “self-improvement” by an intelligent system is the first
step towards the Singularity, in Kurzweil’s influential (2000) account),
and, far from coincidentally, best accounts for the sense in which the
term is used by the technologists and pundits of Silicon Valley.

That Kelly’s assemblage of what might appear disparate themes retains
its influence (or, at least, that the confluence of these themes in the
discourse of the technology industry on which his work draws remains
significant) is evident from the continued prevalence of far-reaching
visions of human and technological development in Silicon Valley, many
of which draw directly on the “articulation” which Kelly prescribes. The
almost total overlap between devotees of Eliezer Yudkowsky’s “Applied
Rationality” (which aims to reduce its followers’ susceptibility to
cognitive biases by a process of “debugging” deliberately analogous to
an AI reprogramming itself) and interest in computational AI and the
philosophical and ethical problems it presents; the place of biomimicry,
the design of technological artifacts and systems inspired by, and often
modelling at a mathematical level, the organization of organic systems,
as a common referent of both urban planners and nanotechnologists; and
the entry of rhetoric, like that seen in the announcement of Uber’s new
logo, that points to the dissolution of the distinction between
digital–cybernetic systems and material infrastructures all arguably
meet Kelly’s call for “fresh models of thought” derived from a
complexity-centric view of the world.

While the “systems turn” is far from confined to Silicon Valley, the
degree of influence over capitalist activity which is evident there is
unique (in the sense that predictions of dramatic technological,
cultural and environmental changes are now sufficiently proximate as to
influence investment decisions). In contrast to the orientation of
traders, on Wall Street or the other major centers of financial
speculation, to a market which is unknowable and unpredictable in a
strict mathematical sense, the activities of of Silicon Valley
entrepreneurs and investors are focussed on an apparently inexorable
evolutionary process of technological development – one in which failure
is embraced as a positive element of the selection process, and testing
and iteration guide the product development cycle, always with the
implicit belief that an optimal solution exists. Indeed, the question
for the entrepreneur is often not whether a problem can be solved, but
whether an economic rationale exists for doing so: it is the temptation
to solve a technical problem which is of no concern to the wider public
which, in a sense, represents the technological entrepreneur’s greatest
risk.

Thus we find the figure of the Silicon Valley entrepreneur, a
personality distinguished by her ability not only to engage in
exceptional flights of technical virtuosity or rhetorical brilliance,
but primarily by their acute sense for the relationship between the
social world and their emergent product, operating with an awareness not
only of their status as a historical actor in the grand narrative of
human technological development, but also as subject to the irrational
whims of speculative capital. Moreover, as we will see, the most
practical processes of product development are structured along
evolutionary lines, with testing and iteration in many ways constituting
the primary entrepreneurial responsibility in the early stages of the
startup firm. The process by which a mobile app, the startup firm’s
window to the consumer (and, of course, vice versa), is designed is
exemplary in its reliance on a mode of evolutionary development – one
which is entirely ontologically consistent with the process-oriented
macroeconomics that has just been described.

###Iterative design, ethnography, and the new face of the commodity

> What is at issue is “a particular mode of innovating . . . linked to
> constructions of the market framed by information about the consumer,”
> which, in turn, depends upon a reworking of what is meant by the
> commodity from simply the invention of new commodities to the capture
> or configuration of new worlds into which these commodities are
> inserted. (Thrift 2006: 288, citing Lury 2004: 62)

The development of high technology products by startup firms within the
Silicon Valley ecosystem, particularly consumer-oriented mobile
applications, takes place within a cultural–economic milieu which is
predicated on the assumption that both technical excellence and, equally
importantly, what Thrift terms “rightness” (and entrepreneurs refer to
as “product-market fit” (Blank 2013)) can be achieved by an iterative
process of experimentation and refinement – a model which closely
conforms to the conception of evolution discussed above. Indeed, Steve
Blank, one of the most influential authors and consultants in the “Lean
Startup” movement, describes a startup as a “temporary organization
formed to search for a repeatable and scalable business model” – that is
to say, to identify a “market” for a given product, conduct a series of
essentially ethnographic “customer development interviews,” and,
starting with a “Minimum Viable Product,” iterate the design and
presentation of the commodity until a functional “fit” between the
product and the market is achieved.

The startup’s product, then, far from being centered on an “invention”
in the traditional sense of the word, is implicitly understood as an
emergent form shaped by a continuous iterative development process.
Adopted by a multiplicity of startup firms and their backers, this
process-driven view of entrepreneurship sees startups driving the
“evolution” of technology both at the level of the individual firm’s
product, and, furthermore, at the level of the economy as a whole. The
Darwinian tone of economists like Perez evokes, sometimes explicitly,
the image of a competitive ecosystem in which the “fittest” firms
attract the most resources – that is to say, the highest valuations and
largest slices of investment capital. Fitness here can be understood as
a firm’s relative ability to reinvent itself in response to
environmental, that is to say market conditions. The play between “fit”
as a synonym of Thrift’s sense of rightness, and a more Darwinian notion
of fittingness to an ecological niche is apt: the purportedly efficient
distribution of resources which the competitive startup ecosystem
promotes is seen as an impersonal yet infallible driver of technological
development in a “free market” – an attitude which, needless to say, is
highly sympathetic to the libertarian tendencies of many entrepreneurs,
and which considerably extends the conventional idea of the “invisible
hand of the market.” In principle at least, this mechanism distributes
capital resources to those startups which provide the most valuable
tools to their users, a usefulness which (in an ideal case at least)
will be correctly perceived by investors, and translated by the
entrepreneur into a “revenue model” which will generate optimal
financial rewards for the company and its investors. How, then, can we
start to conceptualize the relations between investors, entrepreneurs,
users, and the distributed network that is made up of instances of
software products that are, particularly in the case of mobile apps,
designed to continually report details about their use?

Taking the influential construct of the firm as agencement (Deleuze &
Guattari 2004; Callon & Muniesa 2003; Callon 2005, 2007 and elsewhere;
Hardie & MacKenzie 2007) as no less applicable, at a structural level,
to the startups and venture capital firms in question here than to the
hedge funds and other capitalist organizational forms to which it has
already so productively been applied, the question arises of how the
design and production of the commodity can be integrated into this
framework, absent as this topic is from earlier studies of speculative
finance. Considering Callon’s definition of an agencement as an actor
“made up of human bodies but also of prostheses, tools, equipment,
technical devices, algorithms, etc.” (2005: 4-5, cit. MacKenzie 2009:
20), it easy to see how this definition can apply to an early-stage firm
which consists of a founding team, the product’s first users, and a
prototype product assembled from code which itself typically depends on
an array of software development kits (SDKs) and application programming
interfaces (APIs) made available by other firms, from Apple and Google
to other nascent enterprises which have arisen to serve the technical
needs of other startups. In the case of startups which primarily
interact with their customers through a mobile app, however, the sense
in which the firm’s agencement includes “tools...technical equipment
\[and\] algorithms” is, it is proposed, somewhat different from that
which MacKenzie and others have drawn from Callon’s work in their
studies of financial traders. Rather than the significant non-human
actors being the technological devices on which the firm’s workers (or
founders) depend in the course of their business activities, it is the
deployment of the app as a tool in the wider world (and as a piece of
equipment which, in a sense, becomes incorporated into the agencement of
the user) which is critical.

The “economy of qualities” described by Callon and his colleagues,
consisting of “highly reflexive markets \[which\] are organized around
two structuring mechanisms: the singularization of goods and the
attachment of goods to (and detachment from) those who consume them”
(2002: 202) might also serve as a basis for a discussion of the mobile
app as a commodity which, unusually, remains so voluble an actor in the
product design process after it has been distributed to the public. What
might be termed “qualification in real time” is regarded as an essential
practice for startups, but is generally impossible for most industrial
products: even modern automobiles, while they may relay extensive
technical data to their manufacturer during maintenance (or even through
continuous data links), do not provide data on whether a given model’s
controls are placed in a way that is pleasing to the driver. It is
significant, too, that the economy which Callon refers to is one which
is still recognizably divisible into “products” and “goods” (which are
“temporarily stabilized products” (200)). In this framework, goods would
be equivalent to a given “release” (or “version) for a software product,
yet for our purposes, it is significant that (particularly in the cases
of mobile applications and web-based services) the version of the
product used by consumers can, more or less reliably, be updated to a
presumably superior updated release at the firm’s behest, calling into
question the usefulness of Callon’s product-good distinction.
Additionally, the “same” product may even be distributed (“attached,” in
Callon’s terms) to different groups of users in quite radically
different design incarnations, and new features may initially be offered
to only a small cohort of randomly selected test users, as part of the
product development and testing process.

Moreover, the process of market testing (and various forms of consumer
research which are conducted prior to the development of the first
product) can, in some instances, lead to so-called “pivots” – the
realization that a startup’s proposed product is radically less likely
to succeed than an alternative proposition which has arisen from the
firm’s exploratory activities (such as the transition from offering
mobile games to delivering marketing infrastructure services, as in the
cases of AppBoy and Branch). It is questionable whether Callon’s account
of the qualification-requalification process is entirely adequate to the
diversity of the activities which are part of the process of finding
“product-market fit:” indeed, the claim of the “Lean” movement is that
it represents a revolutionary shift in the relationship between the
capitalist firm and the consumer and thus, in its own terms, the typical
product development methodology of today’s startups is distinct from the
industrial design processes that seem to be Callon’s main focus. The
notion that the firm’s direction may be entirely altered by the results
of early product tests is certainly foreign to Callon’s analysis of more
traditional industrial design and commodity production processes, such
as those seen in the automobile industry, where, say, Fiat cannot decide
that they would have better prospects as an on-demand delivery service
if they identify that picking up groceries is a major use of their cars:
conversely, however, as Uber’s investment in autonomous vehicle
development shows, a particularly ambitous and well-funded startup may
decide to enter the auto industry as part of their grand strategy to
reconfigure urban transportation infrastructure.

The relationship between product-market fit and the financial markets
(including the relatively closed world of pre-IPO stock sales and VC
funding) is, it is proposed, a critical point of distinction between
venture and financial capitalist investors. The process by which the
potential value of an early-stage firm is assessed by a VC is dependent
on their judgement not only of the fit between the firm’s current
offering and its market, but on the ability of the founders to (if
necessary) execute a completely different business plan based on the
eventual reception their initial idea receives. Indeed, there is a
dialectical tension between investors’ intense concern with the product
on one hand, and on the other their willingness to continue to fund
entrepreneurs who have decided to “pivot” their company: Y Combinator
even asks applicants to list ideas they have had other than the company
they are submitting, and reports that around one in three “graduates”
have completely changed their business plan in the course of their three
month “accelerator” course. The Lean Startup approach is summarized by
Blank as a “build–measure–learn” loop, constructing the startup as a
cybernetic–autopoetic system in which the founders continually integrate
feedback (from both direct interaction with customers and test users,
and analytics data gathered during its use “in the wild”) into the
product design and business model development process. It is the ability
of the founders to learn effectively from the earliest iterations of
their product that, rather than what has been “built” per se (as might
be expected in a knowledge-intensive industry where intellectual
property is typically assumed to be a prime source of an early stage
firm’s value), is most attractive to sophisticated venture capitalists.

It is important, however, to distinguish between the process of
entrepreneurial product development (as institutionalized in the Lean
Startup movement), which I have argued relies on para-ethnographic
processes, and the highly specialized process of user experience (UX)
testing, within which the term “ethnography” is used in a highly
particular sense. The precise definition of UX remains contested both
within the profession and (as those working in the field often bemoan)
among user interface designers, product managers and CEOs; in
particular, UX researchers frequently seek to distance themselves from
“mere” interaction designers. The term “user experience” was first used
by Donald Norman in reference to his work at Apple (Norman 1995); more
recently, Norman has indicated that he intended the term “to cover all
aspects of the person’s experience with the system including industrial
design, graphics, the interface, the physical interaction, and the
manual” (Merholz 2007). Since its earliest days, the field of UX
research has, not surprisingly given the phenomenological character of
Norman’s expanded definition, relied heavily on conducting studies on
the users (or potential users) of software systems in the context of
their use; this method is, furthermore, refered to as “ethnography” by
practitioners whose methods may have rather little to do with those of
anthropology, sometimes to the confusion of those with disciplinary
backgrounds in the social sciences (Prabhala et al 2011). Paradoxically,
while the entry of a method literally termed ethnography to a scene
which has already been characterized here as para-ethnographic might
seem to confirm the anthropological sensibilities of the startup world,
practitioners within UX research would likely be more self-consciously
resistant to this characterization of their activities than VCs or
entrepreneurs.

In this vein, we find that Paul Dourish, one of the most influential
theorists of UX, while suggesting that “ethnographic approaches can be
used to uncover requirements for a system design through the detailed
observation of the working setting” (2001: 76), in fact points to
ethnomethodology (rather than critical ethnography) as a source of
“fundamental insights about the organization of action as being a
moment-to-moment, naturally occurring, improvisational response to
practical problems” (77). The Heideggerian tone of Dourish’s approach is
clear, and he refers extensively to phenomenology (along with Giddens’
notion of “locales,” Garfinkel’s analysis of social action and other
sociological theoretical material) in his action-oriented theory of
interaction design. The highly bounded nature of this kind of
“ethnographic” inquiry is clear. Moreover, Crabtree and his colleagues,
in a remarkable moment of reflexive methodological commentary entitled
Ethnography Considered Harmful, observe that, from the perspective of
product design, “the very tradition that gave rise to ethnography’s
utility…is one that relies upon a distinct analytic orientation to
fieldwork, which seeks to uncover the locally organized character of
action and interaction” (2009: 880) and that the potential harm of
ethnography to design comes from an attempt to do the work of
anthropology – producing “descriptions that offer up little more than
‘scenic features’ of action and interaction for consideration, thus
sensitizing designers to little more than the grossly observable
features of a setting or culture” (883). Thus the present study
admittedly proceeds in some tension with the professional norms of
“ethnographers” working in UX design: a tension which, perhaps, reflects
an already uneasy relationship between design and business processes.
Intriguingly, Prabhala and her colleagues suggest that

> Although traditional ethnographic methods are proven to be effective
> in eliciting user requirements for product, service and system
> development, an effective inclusion and integration of user experience
> into requirements engineering processes \[sic\] demands complementary
> insights and strategies that come from design ethnography and human
> factors engineering. (Prabhala et al 2003: 103)

This points to the ethnographically “traditional” nature of the “Lean”
research practices which aim to identify the “pain points” of users
which a startup can address, as distinct from the action-oriented work
of UX research. To situate the practice of “design ethnography” within
its own anthropological context – that is to say, in its place in the
history of the development of productive modes of relation between
humans and the material world and the deep history of the interplay
between tool and user – is, of course, a somewhat distinct project from
any of the business-oriented questions asked by UX researchers
themselves (and quite likely to be seen as unproductive, if not actually
harmful, by at least some in the field). Despite the history of tension
between the “three ethnographies” Prabhala describes, it is hoped even
an ethnographic discourse which is overtly opposed to the work of
anthropology can itself be situated within its anthropological context –
ideally in a way which is ultimately productive for readers situated
within the UX research field as well as anthropologists and media
scholars.

The idea that the capitalist enterprise needs to be understood not only
as a collective of humans and non-humans operating within the domain of
production, speculation or other capitalist activity (as is the case
with the industrial cases that most concern Callon himself, and the
financial trading firms to which his ideas have been applied), but also
as an extended agencement including each instance of the commodity and
its user as an actor, one which returns data to the firm’s operators,
does not appear to have been explored in the anthropological literature
to date. Likewise, while questions of cultural evolution in general have
preoccupied at least some anthropologists (and critical responses to
evolutionary positions have similarly preoccupied their opponents), the
significance of the idea of evolution as an ideological determinant of
economic activity at the level of product development and design has not
been explored. One potentially highly productive theoretical current,
however, comes not from studies of finance or industrial organizations,
but from the emergent field of material culture studies and, more
generally, archeology’s engagement with the study of longue durée
technological change. For the same reasons that evolutionist accounts of
culture have (often rightly) proved controversial, the trajectory of
human technological development at the broadest level is a topic which,
for methodological and historical disciplinary reasons, has tended to
prove problematic for ethnography. A number of recent theorists,
representing the turn to “thing theory” in archeology and anthropology,
may, however, offer a useful point of departure for a drawing together
of strictly anthropological accounts of technological change and
innovation, and the systems-oriented thinking of evolutionary economics
and iterative approaches to design.

###Silicon Valley

In the opening remarks to his Understanding Silicon Valley, an
appropriately optimistically-titled collection of essays on the Bay
Area’s unique concentration of technology firms, economist and scholar
of entrepreneurial business practices Martin Kenney observes that
“Despite the impact of \[the many important electronics and biomedical
technologies developed there\] Silicon Valley as a region or social
system has received only sporadic scholarly attention” (2000: 19). Given
that the substantial literature on this “region or social system” can
still be surveyed in the space of a few pages, this observation appears
to remain largely true today, despite the if anything more pervasive
influence of the region – if anything, his remarks on the importance of
the commercial activities of Silicon Valley in the 1990s based merely on
“electronics and biomedical technologies” seems almost quaint when we
consider the global influence of firms like Google, Apple and Facebook
(combined, of course, with that of the “traditional” hardware and
biosciences sectors) today.

The most influential account of Silicon Valley is, in many respects,
Anna-Lee Saxenian’s Regional Advantage – a work which pre-dates even the
major expansion (and subsequent contraction) of the area’s economy
during the “dot com bubble” in the late 1990s. Saxenian’s account of a
political economy of entrepreneurial development characterized by the
emergence of “a more flexible industrial system, one organized around
the region and its professional and technical net­works rather than
around the individual firm” (1996: 30) remains perhaps the most complete
account of Silicon Valley as a economic and cultural system. She
emphasizes the ideological primacy of technical, rather than financial
motivations in this setting, suggesting that “Silicon Valley's engineers
developed stronger commit­ments to one another and to the cause of
advancing technology than to individual companies or industries” (1996:
36). While this is a characterization which has been challenged, in
recent years, by the emergence both of extremely large, dominant firms
which tend to demand, by more or less coercive means, extreme loyalty
and secrecy (as in the case of Apple and Google) and, in another sense,
by the establishment of high expectations for financial rewards on the
part of privileged workers in a highly competitive labor market, this
vsense of an orientation towards both the future and material
technological development remains, arguably, a definitive characteristic
of Silicon Valley business culture today.

English-Lueck’s Cultures@Silicon Valley (2002) is perhaps the most
extensive ethnographic account of the region as a hub of entrepreneurial
activity, and was produced as part of an ongoing project on Silicon
Valley based at San Jose State University (which lies slightly to the
south of the region’s major technology employers). This work’s focus
remains, however, on the broad sociological features of life in the
area, such as “technological saturation,” and discusses neither the
specificities of extremely specialized technical labor nor the strategic
activities of entrepreneurs and investors in any great detail. Despite
presenting a substantial amount of observational detail, and arguing
strongly for the uniqueness of Silicon Valley in social terms, she does
not articulate these distinctions in terms which make clear the singular
nature of this region in broader economic (or, for that matter,
anthropological) terms. Similarly, and while unique in its focus on the
material culture of the region, Christine Finn’s account of “an
archeologist’s year in Silicon Valley” essentially presents a highly
impressionistic series of vignettes which, despite their conversational
mode and the largely narrative rather than critical or theoretical
content of her text, nonetheless offer a descriptively rich (if
theoretically thin) picture of the quality of lived experience in this
setting. As an ethnography structured around the material practices of
workers in the technology industry, Finn’s text combines evocative
descriptions of the everyday life of Silicon Valley with provocative,
sometimes simplistic assertions such as her claim that “a better
climate, a more outdoors life, and more opportunities for social
interaction” led to the region’s dominance over East Coast centers of
high-technology manufacturing (2001: 18). It should be noted, in
passing, that neither of these works addresses the recent expansion of
the technology industry into the city of San Francisco, and the
significant changes in the social and cultural life of many technology
workers which this has brought about.

While Finn’s archeological roots are clear, Biradavolu’s ethnography of
Indian entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley, which describes “The making of a
transnational techno-capitalist class,” combines an anthropological
perspective on the relationship between science and technology in India
and the emergence of a highly skilled, mobile labor force with analytics
which appear to be more closely derived from the fields of
organizational studies and economics. Biradavolu’s discussion of the
culture of immigrant entrepreneurship in the US – according to which,
conventionally, “immigrants fill secondary sector positions, including
entrepreneurial ventures, in niches rejected by natives” (2008: 28) –
contrasts the experience of unskilled immigrants at the margins of the
economy with that of highly qualified Indian immigrants in the more
egalitarian and (she implies) meritocratic Silicon Valley, while
stressing the role that support networks organized around ethnic lines
are critical to the ability of the entrepreneurs she studied to launch
their ventures.

Biradavolu seems largely to take her informants’ self-construction as
economically rational (neo)liberal subjects essentially at face value,
and reports that they founded ventures because this activity is not
significantly riskier, in economic terms, than an employee position – an
unusual take on the Knightian conception of entrepreneurial risk
acceptance. In contrast, we find a more uneasy assumption of risk among
the New York startup workers studied by Gina Neff, who find a place here
thanks to the obvious similarities between firms in “Silicon Alley” and
those in California, and the fact that “people in New York commonly made
comparisons to what was happening in California and deliberately modeled
behavior on what they perceived was the case” (2012: 118). Central to
Neff’s argument and reading of her ethnographic material is the
proposition that “the dot-com boom occurred at a moment of transition in
U.S. economic history toward riskier work, and the entrepreneurial
spirit that people enacted during the boom was a response to this
economic transition” (6). For her, in contrast to Saxenian’s vision of
an increasingly open and collaborative business environment giving rise
to the “networked organization” and a solidarity between workers which
transcends contractual ties to an individual firm, the emergence of
“startup culture” in New York (and other areas which have sought to
explicitly emulate the Silicon Valley model) is determined by a
structural recomposition of the relation between high technology venture
capital and employees who are, she proposes, increasingly willing to
take on entrepreneurial risks because of the erosion of employment
security in the economy as a whole.

Neff introduces the concept of “venture labor,” “a play on venture
capital” (17) to account for this cultural shift in the relationship
between worker and firm:

> Venture labor is the investment of time, energy, human capital, and
> other personal resources that ordinary employees make in the companies
> where they work. Venture labor is the explicit expression of
> entrepreneurial values by nonentrepreneurs…When people think of their
> jobs as an investment or as having a future payoff other than regular
> wages, they embody venture labor. (16)

Thus the development of startup culture – at least, Neff argues, in New
York – is dependent on the construction of a cultural frame in which the
ontological category of risk, as developed in the technical discourse of
financial capitalism, is in a sense popularized and valorized, while the
neoliberal restructuring of the relation between investment capital,
entrepreneurs and employees shifts this risk from the firm to the
individual at a structural level. Neff does not, however, develop a
critique of the dissemination of this entrepreneurial (in a more
strictly Knightian sense) orientation to employment in relation to the
theories of entrepreneurship which have been reviewed here, leaving the
category of “entrepreneurial values” somewhat under-defined.

Finally, perhaps the most influential critical account of Silicon
Valley, at least from a Marxist perspective, remains Richard Barbrook
and Andy Hamilton’s Californian Ideology, which first appeared in . They
identify this “ideology” as the fusion of neoliberalism with the
counterculture (and, significantly, the radical Left) of the 1960s:

> In this version of the Californian Ideology, each member of the
> virtual class is promised the opportunity to become a successful
> hi-tech entrepreneur. Information technologies, so the argument goes,
> empower the individual, enhance personal freedom, and radically reduce
> the power of the nation-state. Existing social, political and legal
> power structures will wither away to be replaced by unfettered
> interactions between autonomous individuals and their software. (2015:
> 17)

In a tradition which the authors trace to Saint-Simon, the entrepreneurs
of Silicon Valley, Barbrook and Hamilton propose, inherit the rhetoric
of Stalinism insofar as they insist that “the enlightened minority is
leading the ignorant masses towards a utopian civilisation. Any
suffering caused by the introduction of information technologies is
justified by the promise of future liberation” (34). Of particular
interest to Barbrook and Hamilton is the impact of “the Net” on
relations of (commodity) production: indeed, as Barbrook acknowledges in
the introduction to a recent reissue of this text, the then-new world of
“digital peer production” described here looks quaint compared to the
radical reconfigurations of labor relations associated with the “app
economy” today. In many respects, though, this work retains an
uncomfortable relevance to the discourse of Silicon Valley today, where,
if anything, the increasing power of digital systems to move beyond the
free sharing of information to produce previously unimaginable gains in
material productivity is accompanied by a growing attention to political
questions on the broadest scale, giving rise to a range of positions
from “neo-feudalism” to visions of a world in which manual (and much
cognitive) labor is replaced by machines, and a “post-work” society
emerges. Barbrook, furthermore, identified this tendency for Silicon
Valley’s brand of capitalism to “produce communism” as early as 1999, in
an essay recently republished along with The Californian Ideology: just
as Schumpeter himself anticipated the supersession of capitalism,
today’s entrepreneurs and even investors, as Sam Altman and other
venture capitalists’ noted interest in “left” agendas like universal
basic income suggests, appear more than aware of the tensions which
inevitably emerge between the capitalist status quo and their
envisioned, technologically evolved futures.
