#Methodology

The aims of this dissertation – to describe the operation of a complex
assemblage of value-defining activity, social knowledge production and
technical–design labor which is structured by a particular set of
ideological commitments on the part of its participants – are admittedly
broad, and, furthermore, need to be addressed through a set of
theoretical and methodological approaches which are adequate to the
challenges that ethnographies of high-technology elites pose. In this
instance, the close relationship between this study and the existing
reflexive discourse of Silicon Valley requires that a methodological
orientation to an expert population be adopted which is essentially
non-reductive with regard to participants’ – notably VCs' and other
entrepreneurs’ – construction of their own activities. This
collaborative enterprise must, it is argued, be undertaken in ways which
produce knowledge which is legible to, and to some extent integrated
into, the autopoetic discourse of Silicon Valley itself. Particularly in
the context of my own entrepreneurial activity, this implies a
collaborative mode of ethnographic investigation which, while requiring
a particular sensitivity to questions of bias and positioning,
nonetheless has the potential to yield insights into the operation of
this mode of capitalist production which would be unavailable by other
means of inquiry. The sense in which this project is collaborative is,
as we will see, structured primarily by a reaching beyond the boundaries
between ethnography as a critical practice of knowledge production to
engage with the more pragmatic processes of para-ethnography found in
Silicon Valley.

###Collaboration and complicity with techno-economic elites

At the broadest level, the agenda of this study is defined as much by
the conditions in “the field,” that is to say the unique confluence of
ideas which shapes activity in Silicon Valley, as by any neatly defined
prior disciplinary lines of inquiry – as the drawing together of
economic history, material culture studies and complexity theory
outlined above may have already made apparent. Commitment to an
ethnographic method which is open to the unexpected, coupled with an
attention to “the mutually constituting relations between technology and
social change, the cultural foundations of the economic ‘material,’ and
the subtle ways that social relations affect business both at the helm
as well as the frontiers of the New Economy” (Fisher & Downey 2006: 4),
particularly when combined with the ethnographer’s own involvement in a
necessarily high-risk early stage venture, requires a singular
methodological flexibility. Furthermore, an ethnography of high
technology development and business/investment processes such as those
found in Silicon Valley must, it is argued, be one which “advances… by
deferring to, absorbing, and being altered by found reflexive subjects”
(Holmes & Marcus 2012: 129).

The orientation to the subjects of ethnography which characterizes this
project, along with many of the most successful of anthropology’s
engagements with the new worlds of scientific and technical development,
is one of collaboration and complicity with the other entrepreneurs and
investors, as well as users and workers, who will be encountered in this
study. This position is itself shaped by the “present becoming the near
future,” which acts as “a common orientation of ethnographer and \[his\]
subjects, and provides the negotiable basis of mutual concept work – a
shared, baseline imaginary for it – on which the collaborative
experiments with form…\[depend\]” (Marcus 2012: 435). Thus this mode of
ethnographic collaboration which Marcus proposes, with its attention to
the “emergent present,” is one in which the engagement between the
ethnographer and a group of highly expert, reflexive subjects is both
aesthetically and epistemologically sensitive to the becoming of
sometimes surprising futures. This sensitivity, it is hoped, will
contribute to producing an account of Silicon Valley which is resilient
in the face of the inherent instability of this site at both the
micro-scale (through engagements with sometimes rapidly growing, but
also often short-lived firms) and insofar as the “tech sector” remains
subject to macroeconomic turbulence and sociopolitical developments, as
well as technological advances.

A radically collaborative ethnography of science and technology, as
Rabinow and Bennett indicate, “entails a common definition of problems
(or at least the acceptance of the existence of a problem-space) as well
as an agreement to participate in the development and implementation of
techniques of remediation:” it “anticipates the likely reworking of
existing modes of reasoning and intervention, adjusting these modes to
the topography of the emerging problem-space” (2012: 5-6). While the
theoretical bounds of the present problem space can, to some extent, be
delineated – the significance of a certain school of economic philosophy
to venture capital’s orientation to emerging technologies, or of a
highly circumscribed mode of ethnographic inquiry to user interface
design, for instance – the attempt to remediate the para-ethnographic
processes which, it is argued, constitute a surprisingly pre-eminent
mode of knowledge production in Silicon Valley will require that
existing disciplinary modes of reasoning, from anthropology, media
studies and elsewhere, are adopted provisionally but remain open, like
the products of the startups in question, to continuous iteration.

To intervene productively in the professional discourses may, from the
perspective of much critical discourse on the technology industry and
its products, also require something of a re-tooling of the strategies
of dissemination and engagement generally associated with these
disciplines, especially given the explicit tendency of practitioners in
some of the fields in question to regard culturally-focussed (as opposed
to operational) ethnography as suspect, if not actually “harmful” in
business contexts (Crabtree et al 2009). With this in mind, we might
ask, with Fischer,

> can the spread of an ethnographic sensibility become part of a general
> common sense that would allow the construction, evolution, or mutation
> of new flexible “smart” institutions of so-called second-order
> modernization to replace old, brittle bureaucratic forms of command
> and control? (2009: 229)

The description of the startup firm as a “flexible ‘smart’ institution”
disrupting “brittle, bureaucratic” industry incumbents is likely to be
one which is appealing to actors within the entrepreneurial field in
general. Taking seriously the claim that one distinctive feature of
Silicon Valley today is that an “ethnographic sensibility” to potential
customers’ desires, combined with an evolutionary approach to technical
product development which replaces a goal-driven approach to design with
an ongoing process of discovery and iteration that is closer to
ethnographic improvisation (Cerwonka and Maalki, 2008) than the “market
research” function of established corporations, the significance of this
project can be framed in terms of an intervention in the emergence of
“second-order modernization,” that is to say, as a response to Silicon
Valley’s challenge to existing forms of capitalist development which has
its roots in precisely the “ethnographic sensibility” which Fischer
describes. An ethnographic engagement with the techno-economic elites of
Silicon Valley, then, is significant not only as a mode of scholarly
writing which, at least in principle, might describe the unique social
formations which characterize this particularly influential mode of
economic activity, but also in the questions it raises about the role of
(para)ethnographic knowledge, historical reflection, and ontological
speculation in high-technology capitalist development.

###Staging the para-ethnographies of venture capital and entrepreneurship

The deployment of this mode of ethnographic inquiry in the context of a
public which is continually engaged in sense-making with respect to its
own world – based on a distinctive array of ontological commitments and
ideological positions – represents a “doubling” of ethnography in the
sense that both startups and venture capital firms are themselves
committed to a process of knowledge-making which, in the central claim
of this proposition, itself closely resembles the ethnographic
encounter. Indeed, this doubling is further complicated by my own
deployment of the conventional methods of “lean” product development in
an entrepreneurial context. The theoretical sophistication of the
product development and investment opportunity selection processes, in
sophisticated quarters at least, is exemplary of what George Marcus has
termed the “para-ethnographic.” The para-ethnographer, a technocratic or
commercial actor who engages in a process of discovery and description
aimed at the social formations in which their activities are implicated,
is identified by Marcus as a social actor with whom the anthropologist
can best engage by taking seriously their informants’ ability to form a
more or less abstract but (in their mind at least) resolutely
“empirical” picture of the cultural structures in which they themselves
(and/or their customers, users or business partners, including investors
and recipients of funding) operate.

In this context, as Marcus, with Douglas Holmes and David Westbrook,
observes: “Para-ethnographies are…already out there. What they need is
an anthropological staging, a mise-en-scène, to give them articulation
within the complex discourse on the nature and operation of the
contemporary” (2006: 8). It is proposed, provisionally, that an
ethnographic account of the Silicon Valley consumer software industry
today needs to encompass the para-ethnographic processes by which
products are developed and investments selected – and, crucially, that
such a text must not only account for and articulate the
self-constructing practices of technology entrepreneurs within their
broader theoretical and historical context, but should aim to do so in
terms which are at least open to re-incorporation within this elite’s
autopoetic discourse. Provisionally, para-ethnographic engagements can
be identified in not only the entrepreneur’s exploration of the market
for their product and the venture capitalist’s evaluation of their
enterprise, but also the ethnographic activities of UX researchers and
designers, and, in an expanded sense, the technology community’s
construction of its own activities in relation to the broader economy.
Bringing these interconnected para-ethnographic endeavors into focus
will, it is hoped, constitute one of the significant modes of
collaboration with the reflexive publics described in the previous
section.

###An Archeology of the App Economy

The engagement of archeology and anthropology with material culture and
the “social life of things” (Appadurai 1988) provides a repertoire of
theoretical concepts and research methods that is arguably better fitted
to the problem of product development in contemporary startup firms
than, for instance, that of software studies – and, furthermore, one
which is already interwoven with studies of the materiality of
technological systems in scientific, financial and other relevant
contexts. Evolutionary views of technological development in the deep
past can, it is proposed, serve as a singularly productive basis for
situating Silicon Valley’s discourses of iterative and competitive
technological development alongside the knowledge making practices of
UI/UX researchers and designers, and locating both within a wider and
more critical, but still sympathetic anthropological frame.
Anthropological accounts of technological artifacts and their
development which focus on the material can also, it is hoped, serve as
a common ground on which a rapprochement between an “anti-cultural”
practice of ethnography within UX research and a more critical
anthropological practice might be reached. Following the approach to the
description of a political economic system which structures this study,
the use of this methodological archive will integrate analysis of the
shift in the commodity form which characterize Silicon Valley’s “app
economy” into a broader historical and cultural field. More
specifically, it will describe the ways in which the possibility of
consumption is made (at least in select urban areas) ubiquitous and
instantaneous – an “on-demand economy” in which the number of users who
have installed a startup’s app reflects how widely distributed the
equipment which affords access to a given firm’s mode of distribution
has become.

Although some limited attempts have been made to integrate actor-network
theory and the study of technological evolution (eg. Bruun & Hukkinen
2003), studies of contemporary technological change and material
production can find a rich repertoire of conceptual approaches to
“things” offered by a range of scholars who have drawn on Latour and
Callon’s work, including Amiria Henare and Martin Holbraad’s radical
anti-humanism (2006) and Bjørnar Olsen’s call for a symmetrical
anthropology of material culture (2010, 2012) that, in many respects,
goes even further than Latour’s earlier propositions. A perspective on
material cultural development and the relationship between technology
and society, likewise informed by the deep past, which offers obvious
points of kinship to the evolutionary economics discourse is,
furthermore, offered (albeit in somewhat different ways) by the work of
Michael Schiffer (2011) and Ian Hodder (2012).

Hodder’s theory of “entanglement,” in particular, has clear resonances
with evolutionary economics:

> It is very difficult to argue that there is not some directionality to
> human-thing entanglements. It is very difficult to claim that overall,
> along with huge inequalities in wealth and access to health, the world
> is not more entangled in terms of the scale and intensity of human
> mobilization of resources, communication and inter-dependence...A
> non-teleological directionality is produced very simply by the
> difficulty of going back down evolutionary pathways. (Hodder 2012:
> 168)

Archeological approaches to the relationship between material
technological development and sociocultural structures highlight,
amongst other themes, the historically distinctive implications of the
ideology of continuous improvement which characterizes startups’
orientation to the design of their products. While progressive
development obviously characterizes many histories of technological
change, a reading of Schiffer’s “behavioral archeology” in the context
of the “Lean Startup” movement points to the contrasts between this mode
of iterative development and the tendency for technologies to reach a
satisfactory level of performance based on environmental constraints,
after which little development is typically observed absent substantial
external pressure.

Perhaps thanks to its long-standing engagement with human behavioral
ecology and the evolutionary biology of human origins, contemporary
archaeology’s approach to the longue durée history of technological
development is highly resonant with neo-Darwinian economic theories of
entrepreneurship, yet offers some strong critiques of the core
assumptions of Silicon Valley’s dominant self-constructions. Mike
Schiffer’s behavioral archeology (2011 and elsewhere), which describes
processes of technological evolution in response to environmental and
social forces as mediated by human behavior, and its adoption into
Hodder’s somewhat more expansive and eclectic theory of “entanglement”
(2012) offers an approach to technological change which can articulate
the range of material constraints, cultural forces and path dependencies
which shape the innovation process (and, equally importantly, the uses
to which artifacts are put in the world) without resorting to a
reductive technological determinism or, conversely, a purely social
constructivist account. Schiffer both emphasizes the connection between
human behavior, culture and technological change and, at the same time,
warns that “technological revolution is a concept and theme nearly as
problematic and value-laden as progress” (2011: 15) – pointing to the
critical stance that an anthropological approach to, say, Carlota Perez’
ideas on both these topics should adopt. Likewise, Schiffer cautions
that “ An invention requires an inventor; a process does not… the media
fashion a technology’s creation myth” (11), usefully highlighting the
tension between the distributed and collaborative process of product
development in the startup and the “creation myth” of the heroic
entrepreneur.
