#Research Questions

This study will treat Silicon Valley as a political economic unity –
that is to say, what I here define as as that

>1: complex assemblage of material conditions, ideological and epistemic
positions, and regulatory-legal structures which

>2: determines the distribution of labor, capital and other resources
among

>3: the range of commodity production and distribution activities within
its scope.

Under this rubric, the broad question of how such a unity can be
described in anthropological and historical terms can be broken down
into three large-scale thematic questions – tracing the origins of the
normative structures of belief and practice, the operations of the
regime of valuation, and the particularities of this mode of commodity
production respectively. Corresponding to these three dimensions of a
political–economic structure, the following three core questions of this
study are addressed to each of these themes in turn. These questions
are, of course, by no means the only angles from which each might be
approached: particular in relation to the activities of what are, at
least in some cases, highly globalized firms with operations which span
a wide range of business activities, topics such as the relation between
workers using platforms like Uber as contractor–employees and the
startups running these platforms are arguably equally significant. The
emphasis of the present study, however, is on the activities of
entrepreneurs and their investors, and as such these questions have been
identified as the most critical to the characterization of startups in
general – including those which do not, for instance, employ people
other than a small team producing the core product.

###1: How do theories of entrepreneurship structure activity in Silicon Valley?

Silicon Valley cannot be reduced to an “innovation cluster” in which a
large number of firms in an industry are positioned close together
solely for practical or political reasons: it has, since its relatively
early days, constituted itself as different from other modes of
capitalism (Saxenian 1996; English-Lueck 2002), and celebrated its
connections with the “counterculture” (Turner 2010). More specifically,
as Andriessen’s public comments frequently reveal, entrepreneurial and
investment activity in Silicon Valley is guided by a reflexively applied
theory of entrepreneurial economic and technological development which
is based on concepts of evolution and emergence, fusing Schumpeter’s
theory of entrepreneurship with constructions of the economy as a
complex evolving system (analogous to those found in natural physical
and biological systems) which were popularized in West Coast capitalist
circules after initially being developed at the Santa Fe Institute and
elsewhere (Anderson et al 1988; Arthur et al 1997). Schumpeterian ideas,
fused with this “process-and-emergence” view of economic and
technological development on a grand historical scale shape not only the
high-level understanding of technological development which shapes
investment philosophies, but also, this study proposes, provide a
normative context for the behavior of individual entrepreneurs.

The question of how economic models shape markets and the behavior of
their participants has been perhaps the most widely-explored theme in
social studies of financial capitalism (e.g. MacKenzie 2008a, 2008b).
This study will consider how, rather than the quantitative–algorithmic
models that underlie the operations of the derivatives, foreign exchange
and equity markets (amongst numerous others), the venture
capital–startup ecosystem of Silicon Valley is constituted by
essentially social and qualitative models of entrepreneurial activity
and its associated economic cycles. These models, it is proposed, shape
not only the investment strategy of venture capitalists like Andriessen,
but also the orientation of entrepreneurs from Butterfield and Kalanick
to the far more numerous unknown startup founders to their ventures and
the risks they entail. Compared to the relationship between financial
speculators, such as derivatives traders, for whom the investment
vehicles in which they deal are quintessentially abstracted from the
firms, currencies or commodities which underlie the complex instruments
of the financial markets “proper,” this orientation to the social is a
vital distinction. The myth of the heroic entrepreneur, as perpetuated
in the online sphere by figures like @FAKEGRIMLOCK and various
influential investors and founders, is, it will be argued, deeply
embedded in the history of economic thought about entrepreneurship and
innovation. It is, it will be argued, at the level of the affects of the
entrepreneur, their relation to the social world of their customers,
investors and employees, and a particular confidence in the future
trajectory of technological development in general that the dominant
neo-Schumpeterian model of entrepreneurship exercises its normative
force over the activities of startup founders and venture capitalists.
The distinctive online and “real-world” discourse of the “startup scene”
(not to mention the actual culture of Silicon Valley and the broader Bay
Area entrepreneurial culture) embodies, it will be argued, a set of
expectations about entrepreneurial behavior which are clearly traceable
to the work of Schumpeter and even earlier economic theorists along with
more recent theorists of evolutionary economics, and which have now
melded with the “quantified self” and “Applied Rationality” movements,
amongst others, to produce a generalized ideology of evolutionary
iteration which is applied in both business and personal contexts.

###2: How do entrepreneurs and VCs mediate knowledge about the social world of the market into claims to economic value?

Based on an understanding of the potential of entrepreneurial ventures
which is shaped by ideas of iteration and “network effects” and
evolutionary competition between firms, the economic agents of Silicon
Valley engage in a process of value creation which has, in recent years,
stabilized into a fairly consistent sequence of mediating practices on
the part of founders and investors. That many outside the technology
industry, including both mass media commentators and more conventional
investment analysts, have questioned whether value is truly being
created, at least according to the norms of valuation established in
prior historical periods of capitalist development, or merely being
assigned to firms based on a circular logic of endlessly deferred
expectations of profitability. The investment opportunity selection and
valuation processes have been extensively documented by participants on
“both sides of the table” (the title of entrepreneur-turned-VC Mark
Suster’s influential blog on these topics), typically under the rubric
of advice to entrepreneurs who are seeking investment capital at various
stages of their business.

The case of Slack is, once again, exemplary here. While Stewart
Butterfield’s musings on the dialectics of product development may have
been addressed mainly to the communication of “value” to potential
users, it is rather obvious that the value of the firm has also been
communicated equally effectively to investors. Indeed, Butterfield has
stated that he would not have accepted venture capital funding at a
valuation below \$1bn! The indicators of potential value which investors
seek are, as we will see, predominantly social in character, whether
measured quantitatively (the “metrics” which so concern every app
operator) or through more qualitative assessments of customer sentiment
– an assessment which, needless to say, is implicitly future-oriented.
Of particular value are signs the “network effects” first characterized
by evolutionary economist Brian Arthur may be emerging and that the
business is likely to enjoy increasing returns at scale. Network effects
emerge in certain businesses where the usefulness of the product to its
users grows exponentially as its user base expands, as in the case of a
marketplace where the chances that a product will be available to buyers
is proportional to the number of sellers who have been recruited or a
messaging app that is only useful if the person one wishes to
communicate with is also using it. The ideas of natural monopolies in
internet businesses which profoundly influences the strategies of Peter
Thiel, Fred Wilson and other notable investors has its roots in Arthur’s
observation that in networked capitalism, “the tendency \[is\] for that
which is ahead to get farther ahead, \[and\] for that which loses
advantage to lose further advantage” (1996: 100).

Butterfield’s attention to the details of his product’s users’ working
lives is exemplary of the “customer development” methodology at the core
of the “Lean” approach to entrepreneurial product development (Ries
2011), a proceduralization of the startup process which has been
described as “hypothesis-driven entrepreneurship” and which has its
roots in Japanese industrial process management philosophies, such as
Toyota’s kaizen approach. In this methodology,

> Entrepreneurs…translate their vision into falsifiable business model
> hypotheses, then test the hypotheses using a series of ‘minimum viable
> products,’ each of which represents the smallest set of
> features/activities needed to rigorously validate a concept. Based on
> test feedback, entrepreneurs must then decide whether to persevere
> with their business model, ‘pivot’ by changing some model elements, or
> abandon the startup. (Eisenmann, Ries and Dillard 2012)

An understanding of the product under development in the social context
of its use is central not only to the design process in the “Lean”
startup but, moreover, to securing venture capital funding for the firm:
in that sense, the role of the entrepreneur is to produce a
value-bearing Aufhebung from the dialectical interaction of product and
user, to extend Butterfield’s observation. This can be seen as an
essentially mediatic outcome from the dialectic between the startup and
its users, and one which has as its implied interlocutor the VCs whom
the entrepreneur will be seeking funding from as much as the customer
themselves. To demonstrate “traction,” evidence that real-world users
are enthusiastically adopting (and, preferably, promoting) a service,
is, for obvious reasons, the most reliable way for an entrepreneur to
secure investment in their venture: indeed, the data which a startup
needs to gather measures the “Pirate metrics” of Acquisition,
Activation, Retention, Referral and Revenue which have been made
canonical by Paul Graham, entrepreneur and head of the 500 Startups
accelerator. At the center of the fundraising function of the startup’s
founders, it will be argued, is the entrepreneur’s ability to mediate
this social proof of their venture’s usefulness (which, of course, to
investors translates into the potential for the concept to be monetized)
through the various performances which make up the “pitching” process.

This process of quasi-anthropological knowledge production combined with
the presence of a (real or imagined) expert interlocutor in the form of
the investor marks this process as one which, in George Marcus’ terms,
is quintessentially “para-ethnographic” (Holmes & Marcus 2006, 2012;
Marcus 2007 and elsewhere). The para-ethnographic recognizes that,
particularly in the encounter between the academic ethnographer and
technical or business specialists (although by no means only in these
“elite” situations), the subjects of anthropology

> have developed something like an ethnography of both their own
> predicaments and those who have encroached on them, and that their
> knowledge practices in this regard are in some sense prallel to the
> anthropologist’s (Holmes & Marcus 2006: 35)

This study will situate the processes of social knowledge production
embodied in the venture capital opportunity selection process, and the
Lean Startup business and product develop methodology, both within their
historical genealogies, in relation to classical theories of
entrepreneurial activity, and in their anthropological–historical
context as theories of the firm and commodity. That they were generated
by expert participants in the market notwithstanding, a
para-ethnographic sensibility emphasizes that they deserve to be taken
seriously on their own terms – to provide the professional discourses of
Silicon Valley with, as Marcus and his colleagues put it, “an
anthropological staging, a mise-en-scène, to give them articulation
within the complex discourse on the nature and operation of the
contemporary” (Holmes, Marcus and Westerbrook 2006: 8). This analysis
will not only distinguish this particular mode of economic rationality
from other processes of capitalist valuation, but will show how a
Schumpeterian economic outlook combines with an orientation to future
social worlds – the worlds, of course, in which the value of today’s
nascent enterprises may actually be realized – which is conspicuous by
its absence from the professional discourse of many other areas of
capitalist development: while instruments like derivatives and credit
default swaps are, of course, oriented to future conditions, the
rationality by which those futures are assigned probabilities (and hence
values) rarely, if ever, depends on an analysis of the kind of
explicitly social and cultural data that increasingly concern investors
in startups.

###3: How is Silicon Valley’s “app economy” changing the commodity form?

Just as the startup occupies, in Gramscian terms, a hegemonic position
with respect to contemporary capitalist development – defining the terms
of this historical period out of proportion to its actual contribution
to the economy – so startups offering consumer-focussed products and
services via a mobile app represent the most culturally influential
(and, in some cases, most highly valued) new enterprises emerging in
Silicon Valley today. There are now around 105 mobile internet-focussed
startups with valuations in excess of \$1bn globally, of which more than
half are located in North America, and revenues for the sector are
predicted to rise to \$850bn by 2018 from around \$300bn in 2014
(Digi-Capital 2015). This is, clearly, a significant moment in the
history of the commodity: from the apps themselves (which constitute a
category of media which has, to date, largely been neglected by both
anthropology and media studies (Miller and Matviyenko 2014)) to the
services and goods distributed through them, these systems afford
radically new relationships between persons and things. The emergence of
a distinct category of business model, in which services as diverse as
food deliveries, massage, dog walking or cognitive behavioral therapy
are delivered via a proprietary mobile app (which may be the vehicle for
the entire interaction, as in the case of the various apps offering to
connect users with therapists or coaches, or which may serve to trigger
the dispatch of a “real-world” service provider) introduces a
significant new element, that of user experience design, into the
process of launching a new enterprise and, furthermore, a new experience
of mediated affordance into the quotidian experience of consumption.
Rather than confining its attention to advertising and marketing or to
the design of the product itself (whether physical or software), user
experience design encompasses the entirity of the consumer’s interaction
with the firm, including not only questions of user interface design
(UI) but also contacts with customers before they “sign up,” and the
design of service provision in the physical world, such as Lyft’s
attempt to distinguish its own transportation service from Uber’s by
emphasizing the friendly relation between drivers and passengers, or
Airbnb’s efforts to “educate” its users into being better hosts and
guests.

As well as reorganizing the ownership of resources through “sharing
economy” platforms like Uber (which began as a platform for limousine
drivers to earn extra fees while not working for their main employers)
and relations of productive labor through myriad other platforms like
TaskRabbit, Handy or Alfred, the intensity of the experimental and
iterative design process which lies behind these apps has led to a
massive expansion of the role of user interface and user experience (UI
and UX) researchers, who themselves deploy what they term “ethnographic
methods” on a routine basis. As we will see, however, the articulation
of the social (that is to say, potential economic) value of an
enterprise to investors is a process of mediation which is no less
“ethnographic” in character, yet which seems to have rather little in
common with design-focussed research – and yet, at the same time, the
success or failure of a startup’s quest for funding may, beyond the
earliest stages, depend critically on the outcome of design processes
which are directly based on the “ethnographic” work of UX researchers.

Situated at the forefront of a wide-ranging interdisciplinary
conversation on the evolution of the commodity form in its cultural
contexts, this study will examine how this novel form of commodity
(which has been dominated by Silicon Valley-based entrepreneurial firms,
from thousands of app development startups to the initial creation of
mobile software and hardware platforms by Apple and Google) poses new
questions for approaches to consumer culture in general, as well as
media and material culture studies. It will also show how an expansive
study of a political economic system needs to encompass aspects of
commodity production, technological innovation and design which have,
too often, been sidelined in favor of more classically “economic”
concerns. While in some instances the replacement of employees in
industries like transportation with “contractors” – who, as firms like
Uber insist (in the face of increasing legal and legislative challenges)
are not employees of the startups, but merely another class of app user
– represents the “commodification of labor” in a distinctly vulgar
sense, it is nonetheless critical to an understanding of the substantial
social issues raised by this specific form of capitalist development
that we grasp the relationship between the challenges of app development
and design and the economic outcomes of the firms behind them. Thus this
study will propose that to fully account for the significance of
mobile-based platforms at a political–economic level, an ethnography of
this form of capitalist development must necessarily address the
materiality (or at least, the equipmentality) of the apps which provide
a literal interface between the user and this reconfigured world of
commodities (both services and things) which can, in the industry’s own
terms, be summoned “on-demand.” Moreover it must do so in a way which is
relates these processes to the broader ideology of iterative,
evolutionary technological progress which underlie Silicon Valley’s
unique take on capitalist development.
